CHAPTER XXXIV.
It was near Christmas, by the time all was settled.
The season of general holiday approached.
I now closed Morton's school, taking care that the parting should not be barren on my
side.
Good fortune opens the hand as well as the heart wonderfully, and to give some what when
we have largely received is but to afford a vent to the unusual ebullition of the sensations.
I had long felt with pleasure that many of my rustic scholars liked me, and when we parted,
that consciousness was confirmed.
They manifested their affection plainly and strongly.
Deep was my gratification to find I had really a place in their unsophisticated hearts.
I promised them that never a week should pass in future that I did not visit them and give
them an hour's teaching in their school.
Mr. Rivers came up as, having seen the classes now numbering sixty girls file out before
me and lock the door, I stood with the key in my hand, exchanging a few words of special
farewell with some half-dozen of my best scholars, as decent, respectable, modest, and well-informed
young women as could be found in the ranks of the British peasantry.
And that is saying a great deal, for, after all, the British peasantry are the best-taught,
best-mannered, most self-respecting of any in Europe.
Since those days I have seen paisans and bayrungen, and the best of them seem to me ignorant,
of course, and besotted compared with my Morton girls.
Do you consider you have got your reward for a season of exertion, asked Mr. Rivers when
they were gone?
Does not the consciousness of having done some real good in your day and generation
give pleasure?
Doubtless.
And you have only toiled a few months.
Would not a life devoted to the task of regenerating your race be well spent?
Yes, I said.
But I could not go on for ever so.
I want to enjoy my own faculties as well as to cultivate those of other people.
I must enjoy them now.
Don't recall either my mind or body to the school.
I am out of it and disposed for full holiday.
He looked grave.
What now?
What sudden eagerness is this, you events?
What are you going to do?
To be active, as active as I can.
And first I must beg you to set Hannah at liberty and get somebody else to wait on you.
Do you want her?
Yes, to go with me to Morehouse.
Diana and Mary will be at home in a week, and I want to have everything in order against
their arrival.
I understand.
I thought you were flying off on some excursion.
It is better so.
Hannah shall go with you.
Tell her to be ready by to-morrow then, and here is the school-room key.
I will give you the key of my cottage in the morning.
He took it.
You give it up very gleefully, said he.
I don't quite understand your light-heartedness, because I cannot tell what employment you
propose to yourself as a substitute for the one you are relinquishing.
What aim, what purpose, what ambition in life have you now?
My first aim will be to clean down.
Do you comprehend the full force of the expression?
To clean down Morehouse from chamber to cellar.
My next to rub it up with beeswax, oil, and an indefinite number of cloths till it glitters again.
My third to arrange every chair, table, bed, carpet with mathematical precision.
Afterwards I shall go near to ruin you in coals and peat to keep up good fires in every room.
And lastly, the two days preceding that on which your sisters are expected will be devoted
by Hannah and me to such a beating of eggs, sorting of currants, grating of spices,
compounding of Christmas cakes, chopping up of materials for mince pies, and solemnizing
of other culinary rites, as words can convey but an inadequate notion of to the uninitiated like you.
My purpose, in short, is to have all things in an absolutely perfect state of readiness
for Diana and Mary before next Thursday, and my ambition is to give them a bow ideal of a welcome when they come.
St. John smiled slight. Still he was dissatisfied.
It is all very well for the present, said he.
But seriously, I trust that when the first flush of vivacity is over,
you will look a little higher than domestic endearments and household joys.
The best things the world has, I interrupted.
No, Jane, no. This world is not the scene of fruition.
Do not attempt to make it so, nor of rest. Do not turn slothful.
I mean, on the contrary, to be busy.
Jane, I excuse you for the present. Two months' grace I allow you for the full enjoyment of your new position,
and for pleasing yourself with this late-found charm of relationship.
But then I hope you will begin to look beyond Morehouse and Morton, and sisterly society,
and the selfish calm and sensual comfort of civilized affluence.
I hope your energies will then once more trouble you with their strength.
I looked at him with surprise.
St. John, I said, I think you are almost wicked to talk so.
I am disposed to be as content as a queen, and you try to stir me up to restlessness.
To what end?
To the end of turning to profit the talents which God has committed to your keeping,
and of which he will surely one day demand a strict account.
Jane, I shall watch you closely and anxiously, I warn you of that,
and try to restrain the disproportionate fervour with which you throw yourself into commonplace home pleasures.
Don't cling so tenaciously to ties of the flesh.
Save your constancy and ardour for an adequate cause.
Forbear to waste them on trite, transient objects.
Do you hear, Jane?
Yes, just as if you were speaking Greek.
I feel I have adequate cause to be happy, and I will be happy.
Good-bye.
Happy at Morehouse I was, and hard I worked, and so did Hannah.
She was charmed to see how jovial I could be amidst the bustle of a house turned topsy-turvy.
How I could dust, and brush, and clean, and cook.
And really, after a day or two of confusion, worse confounded,
it was delightful, by degrees, to invoke order from the chaos ourselves had made.
I had previously taken a journey to S., to purchase some new furniture,
my cousins having given me carte blanche to effect what alterations I pleased,
and of some having been set aside for that purpose.
The ordinary sitting-room and bedrooms I left much as they were,
for I knew Diana and Mary would derive more pleasure from seeing again
the old homely tables and chairs and beds
than from the spectacle of the smartest innovations.
Still, some novelty was necessary to give their return the piquancy
with which I wished it to be invested.
Dark, handsome new carpets and curtains,
an arrangement of some carefully selected antique ornaments in porcelain and bronze,
new coverings in mirrors and dressing cases for the toilet tables,
answered the end. They looked fresh without being glaring.
A spare parlor and bedroom I refurnished entirely with old mahogany and crimson upholstery.
I laid canvas on the passage and carpets on the stairs.
When all was finished, I thought more houses complete a model
of bright, modest snugness within, as it was at this season,
a specimen of wintry waste and desert-drewiness without.
The eventful Thursday at length came. They were expected about dark,
and at our desk fires were lit upstairs and below.
The kitchen was in perfect trim. Hannah and I were dressed and all was in readiness.
St. John arrived first. I had entreated him to keep quite clear of the house
till everything was arranged.
And, indeed, the bare idea of the commotion, at once sorted and trivial,
going on within its walls, sufficed to scare him to estrangement.
He found me in the kitchen, watching the progress of certain cakes for tea, then baking.
Approaching the hearth, he asked if I was at last satisfied with housemaids' work.
I answered by inviting him to accompany me on a general inspection of the result of my labors.
With some difficulty I got him to make the tour of the house.
He just looked in at the doors I opened, and when he had wandered upstairs and downstairs
he said I must have gone through a great deal of fatigue and trouble
to have affected such considerable changes in so short a time.
But not a syllable did he utter indicating pleasure in the improved aspect of his abode.
This silence damped me. I thought perhaps the alterations had disturbed
some old associations he valued. I inquired whether this was the case,
no doubt in a somewhat crestfallen tone.
Not at all. He had, on the contrary, remarked that I had scrupulously respected every association.
He feared, indeed, I must have bestowed more thought on the matter than it was worth.
How many minutes, for instance, had I devoted to studying the arrangement of this very room?
By the by, could I tell him where such a book was?
I showed him the volume on the shelf.
He took it down, and with drawing to his accustomed window recess, he began to read it.
Now, I did not like this reader. St. John was a good man,
but I began to feel he had spoken truth of himself when he said he was hard and cold.
The humanities and amenities of life had no attraction for him.
Its peaceful enjoyments no charm.
Literally, he lived only to aspire, after what was good and great, certainly,
but still he would never rest, nor approve of others resting around him.
As I looked at his lofty forehead, still and pale as a white stone,
at his fine liniments fixed in study, I comprehended all at once that he would hardly make a good husband,
that it would be a trying thing to be his wife.
I understood, as by inspiration, the nature of his love for Miss Oliver.
I agreed with him that it was but a love of the senses.
I comprehended how he should despise himself for the feverish influence it exercised over him,
how he should wish to stifle and destroy it,
and how he should mistrust its ever-conducing permanently to his happiness, or hers.
I saw he was of the material from which nature hues her heroes,
Christian and Pagan, her lawgivers, her statesmen, her conquerors,
a steadfast bulwark for great interests to rest upon,
but at the fireside too often a cold, cumbrous column, gloomy and out of place.
This parlour is not his sphere, I reflected, the Himalayan rich or caffer bush,
even the plague-cursed Guinea Coast swamp would suit him better.
Well may he eschew the calm of domestic life, it is not his element.
There his faculties stagnate, they cannot develop or appear to advantage.
It is in scenes of strife and danger, where courage is proved,
and energy exercised, and fortitude tasked, that he will speak and move, the leader and superior.
A merry child would have the advantage of him on this hearth.
He is right to choose a missionary's career. I see it now.
They are coming, they are coming! cried Hannah, throwing open the parlour door.
At the same moment old Carlo barked joyfully. Out I ran.
It was now dark, but a rumbling of wheels was audible.
Hannah soon had a lantern lit. The vehicle had stopped at the wicket.
The driver opened the door. First one well-known form, then another, stepped out.
In a minute I had my face under their bonnets in contact first with Mary's soft cheek,
then with Diana's flowing curls. They laughed, kissed me, then Hannah,
patted Carlo, who was half-wild with delight, asked eagerly if all was well,
and being assured in the affirmative, hastened into the house.
They were stiff from their long and jolting drive from Whitcross,
and chilled with the frosty night air, but their pleasant countenances expanded to the cheerful firelight.
While the driver and Hannah brought in the boxes, they demanded St. John.
At this moment he advanced from the parlour. They both threw their arms round his neck at once.
He gave each one a quiet kiss, said in a low tone a few words of welcome,
stood awhile to be talked to, and then, intimating that he supposed they would soon rejoin him in the parlour,
withdrew there as to a place of refuge.
I had lit their candles to go upstairs, but Diana had first to give hospitable orders respecting the driver.
This done, both followed me. They were delighted with the renovation and decoration of their rooms,
with the new drapery and fresh carpets, and rich tinted china vases.
They expressed their gratification ungrudgingly.
I had the pleasure of feeling that my arrangements met their wishes exactly,
and that what I had done added a vivid charm to their joyous return home.
Sweet was that evening. My cousins, full of exhilaration, were so eloquent in narrative and comment
that their fluency covered St. John's taciturnity.
He was sincerely glad to see his sisters, but in their glow of fervour and flow of joy he could not sympathize.
The event of the day, that is, the return of Diana and Mary, pleased him.
But the accompaniments of that event, the glad tumult, the garrulous glee of reception, irked him.
I saw he wished the quieter morrow was come.
In the very meridian of the night's enjoyment, about an hour after tea, a rap was heard at the door.
Hannah entered with the intimation that
a poor lad was come at that unlikely time to fetch Mr. Rivers to see his mother, who was drawing away.
Where does she live, Hannah?
Clear up at Whitcross Brow, almost four miles off, and more and moss all the way.
Tell them I will go.
I'm sure, sir, you had better not. It's the worst road to travel after dark that can be.
There's no track at all over the bog, and then it is such a bitter night, the keenest win you ever felt.
You had better send word, sir, that you will be there in the morning.
But he was already in the passage, putting on his cloak,
and without one objection, one murmur, he departed.
It was then nine o'clock. He did not return till midnight.
Starved and tired enough he was, but he looked happier than when he set out.
He had performed an act of duty, made an exertion,
felt his own strength to do and deny, and was on better terms with himself.
I am afraid the whole of the ensuing week tried his patience.
It was Christmas week. We took no settled employment,
but spent it in a sort of married domestic dissipation.
The air of the Moors, the freedom of home, the dawn of prosperity,
acted on Diana and Mary's spirits like some life-giving elixir.
They were gay from morning till noon, from noon till night.
They could always talk, and their discourse, witty, pithy, original,
had such charms for me that I preferred listening to and sharing in it
to doing anything else. St. John did not rebuke our vivacity,
but he escaped from it. He was seldom in the house.
His parish was large, the population scattered,
and he found daily business in visiting the sick and poor in its different districts.
One morning, at breakfast, Diana, after looking a little pensive for some minutes,
asked him if his plans were yet unchanged.
Unchanged and unchangeable was the reply,
and he proceeded to inform us that his departure from England
was now definitely fixed for the ensuing year.
And Rosamond Oliver suggested Mary, the words seeming to
escape her lips involuntarily, for no sooner had she uttered them
than she made a gesture as if wishing to recall them. St. John
had a book in his hand. It was his unsocial custom to read at meals.
He closed it and looked up.
Rosamond Oliver, said he, is about to be married to Mr. Granby,
one of the best connected and most estimable residents in S.,
grandson and heir to Sir Frederick Granby.
I had the intelligence from her father yesterday.
His sisters looked at each other, and at me. We all three looked at him.
He was serene as glass.
The match must have been got up hastily, said Diana.
They cannot have known each other long.
But two months they met in October at the county ball at S.
But where there are no obstacles to a union, as in the present case,
where the connection is in every point desirable, delays are unnecessary.
They will be married as soon as S. Palace, which Sir Frederick
gives up to them, can be refitted for their reception.
The first time I found St. John alone after this communication,
I felt tempted to inquire if the event distressed him.
But he seemed so little to need sympathy, that so far from
venturing to offer him more, I experienced some shame at the
recollection of what I had already hazarded. Besides, I was out of practice
in talking to him. His reserve was again frozen over,
and my frankness was congealed beneath it. He had not kept his
promise of treating me like his sisters. He continually made little
chilling differences between us, which did not at all tend to the
development of cordiality. In short, now that I was acknowledged
his kinswoman, and lived under the same roof with him, I felt the
distance between us to be far greater than when he had known me only as the village
school mistress. When I remembered how far I had once been admitted
to his confidence, I could hardly comprehend his present frigidity.
Such being the case, I felt not a little surprised
when he raised his head suddenly from the desk, over which he was stooping,
and said, You see, Jane, the battle is fought,
and the victory won. Startled at being thus addressed,
I did not immediately reply. After a moment's hesitation I answered,
But are you sure you are not in the position
of those conquerors whose triumphs have cost them too dear?
Would not such another ruin you? I think not,
and if I were, it does not much signify. I shall never
be called upon to contend for such another. The event of the
conflict is decisive. My way is now clear. I thank God for it.
So saying, he returned to his papers in his silence.
As our mutual happiness, i.e. Diana's, Mary's, and mine,
settled into a quiet character, and we resumed our usual habits
and regular studies, St. John stayed more at home.
He sat with us in the same room, sometimes for hours together.
While Mary drew, Diana pursued a course of encyclopedic reading
she had, to my awe and amazement, undertaken,
and I fagged away at German. He pondered a mystic lore of his own,
that of some Eastern tongue, the acquisition of which he thought necessary to his
plans. Thus engaged, he appeared, sitting
in his own recess, quiet and absorbed enough. But that blue eye
of his had a habit of leaving the outlandish-looking grammar, and wandering
over, and sometimes fixing upon us, his fellow students,
with a curious intensity of observation. If caught,
it would be instantly withdrawn, yet ever and anon, it returned searchingly
to our table. I wondered what it meant. I wondered, too,
at the punctual satisfaction. He never failed to exhibit on an
occasion that seemed to me of small moment, namely, my weekly visit
to Morton School. And still more was I puzzled when,
if the day was unfavorable, if there was snow or rain or high wind,
and his sisters urged me not to go, he would invariably
make light of their solicitude, and encourage me to accomplish the task
without regard to the elements. Jane is not such a weakling
as you would make her, he would say. She can bear a mountain blast,
or a shower, or a few flakes of snow, as well as any of us.
Her constitution is both sound and elastic, better
calculated to endure variations of climate than many more robust.
And when I returned, sometimes a good deal tired, and
not a little weather-beaten, I never dared to complain, because
I saw that to murmur would be to vex him. On all occasions
fortitude pleased him. The reverse was a special annoyance.
One afternoon, however, I got leave to stay at home, because I really
had a cold. His sisters were gone to Morton in my stead.
I sat reading Schiller, he deciphering his crabbed oriental
scrolls. As I exchanged a translation for an exercise,
I happened to look his way. There I found myself under the influence
of the ever watchful blue eye. How long it had been searching
me through and through, and over and over, I cannot tell.
So keen was it, and yet so cold, I felt for the moment
superstitious, as if I were sitting in the room with something uncanny.
Jane, what are you doing?
Learning German.
I want you to give up German and learn Hindostani.
You are not in earnest.
In such earnest that I must have it so, and I will tell you why.
He then went on to explain that Hindostani was the language he himself
was at present studying, that, as he advanced, he was apt to forget
the commencement, that it would assist him greatly to have a pupil
with whom he might again and again go over the elements, and so fix them
thoroughly in his mind, that his choice had hovered for some time between
me and his sisters, but that he had fixed on me because he saw I could
sit at a task the longest of the three. Would I do him this favor?
I should not, perhaps, have to make the sacrifice long,
as it wanted now barely three months to his departure.
St. John was not a man to be lightly refused. You felt that
every impression made on him, either for pain or pleasure,
was deep-graved and permanent. I consented.
When Diana and Mary returned, the former found her scholar
transferred from her to her brother. She laughed, and both she and Mary
agreed that St. John should never have persuaded them to such a step.
He answered quietly, I know it.
I found him a very patient, very forbearing, and yet an
exacting master. He expected me to do a great deal,
and when I fulfilled his expectations, he, in his own way,
fully testified his approbation. By degrees,
he acquired a certain influence over me that took away my liberty of mind.
His praise and notice were more restraining than his indifference.
I could no longer talk or laugh freely when he was by,
because a tiresomely importunate instinct reminded me that vivacity,
at least in me, was distasteful to him.
I was so fully aware that only serious moods and occupations were acceptable
that in his presence every effort to sustain or follow
any other became vain. I fell under a freezing spell.
When he said go, I went. Come,
I came. Do this. I did it. But I did not
love my servitude. I wished many a time he had continued
to neglect me. One evening, when at bedtime, his
sisters and I stood round him, bidding him good night, he kissed each of them,
as was his custom, and, as was equally his custom, he gave me
his hand. Diana, who chanced to be in a frolicsome humor,
she was not painfully controlled by his will, for hers
in another way was as strong, exclaimed,
St. John, you used to call Jane your third sister, but you don't treat her as such.
You should kiss her, too. She pushed me towards him.
I thought Diana very provoking and felt uncomfortably confused,
and while I was thus thinking and feeling, St. John
bent his head. His Greek face was brought to a level
with mine. His eyes questioned my eyes piercingly.
He kissed me. There are no such things as marble kisses,
or ice kisses, or I should say, my ecclesiastical
cousin's salute belonged to one of these classes.
But there may be experiment kisses, and his was an experiment
kiss. When given, he viewed me to learn the result.
It was not striking. I am sure I did not blush.
Perhaps I might have turned a little pale, for I felt as if
the kiss were a seal affixed to my fetters. He never omitted
the ceremony afterwards, and the gravity and quiescence
with which I underwent it seemed to invest it for him with a certain charm.
As for me, I daily wished more to please him.
But to do so, I felt daily more and more that I must disown
half my nature, stifle half my faculties,
wrest my tastes from their original bent, force myself to the adoption
of pursuits for which I had no natural vocation. He wanted
to train me to an elevation I could never reach. It racked
me hourly to aspire to the standard he uplifted. The thing was
as impossible as to mold my irregular features to his correct and classic
pattern, to give my changeable green eyes the sea-blue
tint and solemn lester of his own. Not his ascendancy
alone, however, held me enthralled at present. Of late, it had been
easy enough for me to look sad. A cankering evil sat at my heart
and drained my happiness at its source, the evil of suspense.
Perhaps you think I had forgotten Mr. Rochester, reader,
amidst these changes of place and fortune.
Not for a moment. His idea was still with me,
because it was not a vapor sunshine could disperse, nor a
sand-traced effigy storms could wash away. It was a name
engraven on a tablet, fated to last as long as the marble
it inscribed. The craving to know what had become of him
followed me everywhere. When I was at Morton, I re-entered
my cottage every evening to think of that, and now at Morehouse
I sought my bedroom each night to brood over it.
In the course of my necessary correspondence with Mr. Briggs about the will,
I had inquired if he knew anything of Mr. Rochester's present residence
and state of health, but, as St. John had conjectured, he was quite
ignorant of all concerning him. I then wrote to Mrs. Fairfax
entreating information on the subject. I had calculated
with certainty on this step answering my end. I felt sure
it would elicit an early answer. I was astonished when a fortnight
passed without reply, but when two months wore away, and day after
day the post arrived and brought nothing for me, I fell prey to
the keenest anxiety. I wrote again.
There was a chance of my first letter having missed. Renewed hope
followed renewed effort. It shone like the former for some weeks,
then, like it, faded, flickered. Not a line,
not a word reached me. When half a year wasted
in vain expectancy, my hope died out, and then I felt
dark indeed. A fine spring shone round me, which
I could not enjoy. Summer approached. Diana tried to cheer
me. She said I looked ill, and wished to accompany me to the seaside.
This St. John opposed. He said I did not want dissipation,
I wanted employment. My present life was too purposeless.
I required a name, and, I suppose, by way of supplying deficiencies,
he prolonged still further my lessons in Hindostani,
and grew more urgent in requiring their accomplishment.
And I, like a fool, never thought of resisting him. I could not
resist him. One day I had come to my studies
in lower spirits than usual. The ebb was occasioned by a poignantly
felt disappointment. Hannah had told me in the morning there was a letter
for me, and when I went down to take it, almost certain that the long
looked-for tidings were vouchsafed me at last, I found only
an unimportant note from Mr. Briggs on business.
The bitter check had wrung for me some tears,
and now, as I sat poring over the crabbed characters of flourishing tropes
of an Indian scribe, my eyes felled again.
St. John called me to his side to read. In attempting to
do this, my voice failed me. Words were lost and sobs.
He and I were the only occupants of the parlour. Diana was practicing
her music in the drawing-room. Mary was gardening.
It was a very fine May day, clear, sunny, and breezy.
My companion expressed no surprise at this emotion,
nor did he question me as to its cause. He only said,
We will wait a few minutes, Jane, till you are more composed.
And while I smothered the paroxysm with all haste, he sat calm
and patient, leaning on his desk and looking like a physician watching with the eye
of science an expected and fully understood crisis in a patient's
malady. Having stifled my sobs, wiped my eyes,
and muttered something about not being very well that morning, I resumed
my task, and succeeded in completing it. St. John
put away my books, and his, locked his desk, and said,
Now, Jane, you shall take a walk, and with me.
I will call Diana and Mary. No.
I want only one companion this morning, and that must be you.
Put on your things, go out by the kitchen door. Take the road
towards the head of Marsh Glen. I will join you in a moment.
I know no medium. I never in my life have known any medium
in my dealings with positive hard characters, antagonistic to my own,
between absolute submission and determined revolt.
I have always faithfully observed the one up to the very moment
of bursting, sometimes with volcanic vehemence, into the other,
and as neither present circumstances warranted, nor my present
mood inclined me to mutiny, I observed careful obedience to
St. John's directions, and in ten minutes I was treading the wild
track of the Glen, side by side with him. The breeze was from the
west. It came over the hills, sweet with scents of heath and rush.
The sky was of stainless blue. The stream descending
the ravine, swelled with past spring rains, poured along plentiful
and clear, catching golden gleams from the sun and sapphire tints
from the firmament. As we advanced and left the track,
we trod a soft turf, mossy fine and emerald green,
minutely enameled with a tiny white flower, and spangled with a star-like
yellow blossom. The hills meantime shut us quite in,
for the Glen, towards its head, wound to their very core.
Let us rest here, said St. John, as we reached the first stragglers
of a battalion of rocks, guarding a sort of pass beyond which
the beck rushed down a waterfall, and where, still a little further,
the mountain shook off turf and flower, had only heath for
raiment, and crag for gem, where it exaggerated the wild
to the savage, and exchanged the fresh for the frowning,
where it guarded the forlorn hope of solitude and a last refuge
for silence. I took a seat.
St. John stood near me. He looked up the pass and down
the hollow. His glance wandered away with the stream, and turned
to traverse the unclouded heaven which colored it. He removed his
hat, let the breeze stir his hair and kiss his brow. He seemed
in communion with the genius of the haunt. With his eye he bade farewell
to something.
And I shall see it again, he said aloud, in dreams when I
sleep by the gangies, and again in a more remote hour,
when another slumber overcomes me on the shore of a darker stream.
Strange words of a strange love!
An austere patriot's passion for his fatherland!
He sat down. For half an hour we never spoke. Neither he to me
nor I to him. That interval passed. He recommends
Jane, I go in six weeks. I have taken my birth
in an East Indian inn which sails on the 20th of June.
God will protect you, for you have undertaken his work, I answered.
Yes, said he, there is my glory
and joy. I am the servant of an infallible master.
I am not going out under human guidance, subject to
the defective laws and erring control of my feeble fellow worms.
My king, my law-giver, my captain, is the all-perfect.
It seems strange to me that all round me do not burn
to enlist under the same banner, to join in the same enterprise.
All have not your powers, and it would be folly
for the feeble to wish to march with the strong.
I do not speak to the feeble, or think of them. I address
only such as are worthy of the work, and competent to accomplish it.
Those are few in number, and difficult to discover.
You say truly, but when found,
it is right to stir them up, to urge and exhort them to effort,
to show them what their gifts are, and why they were given, to speak
heaven's message in their ear, to offer them direct from God
a place in the ranks of his chosen. If they are really
qualified for the task, will not their own hearts be the first
to inform them of it? I felt as if an awful charm was
framing round and gathering over me. I trembled to hear some fatal
words spoken which would at once declare and rivet the spell.
And what does your heart say? demanded St. John.
My heart is mute, my heart is mute,
I answered, struck and thrilled. Then I must speak for it,
continued the deep, relentless voice. Jane,
come with me to India. Come as my help-meet and fellow-labourer.
The glen and sky spun round, the hills heaved.
It was as if I had heard a summons from heaven, as if a visionary messenger,
like him of Macedonia, had announced,
Come over and help us. But I was no apostle.
I could not behold the herald, I could not receive his call.
Oh, St. John, I cried, have some mercy.
I appealed to one who, in the discharge of what he believed his duty,
knew neither mercy nor remorse. He continued,
God and nature intended you for a missionary's wife.
It is not personal, but mental endowments they have given you.
You are formed for labour, not for love. A missionary's wife you must,
shall be. You shall be mine. I claim you, not for my
pleasure, but for my sovereign service. I am not fit
for it, I have no vocation, I said. He had calculated
on these first objections. He was not irritated by them.
Indeed, as he leaned back against the crag behind him, folded his
arms on his chest, and fixed his countenance, I saw he was prepared
for a long and trying opposition, and had taken in a stock of patience
to last him to its close. Resolved, however, that the clothes
should be conquest for him. Humility, Jane,
said he, is the groundwork of Christian virtues. You say
right that you are not fit for the work. Who is fit for it?
Or, who, that ever truly called, believes himself worthy
of the summons? I, for instance, am but dust and ashes.
With St. Paul, I acknowledge myself the chiefest of sinners,
but I do not suffer this sense of my personal vileness to daunt
me. I know, my leader, that he is just
as well as mighty, and while he has chosen a feeble instrument to
perform a great task, he will, from the boundless stores of his
providence, supply the inadequacy of the means to the end.
Think like me, Jane. Trust like me. It is the rock of
ages I ask you to lean on. Do not doubt, but it will bear the weight
of your human weakness. I do not understand
a missionary life. I have never studied missionary labors.
There, I, humble as I am, can give you the aid you want.
I can set your task from hour to hour, stand by you always,
help you from moment to moment. This I could do in the beginning.
Soon, for I know your powers, you would be as strong and apt
as myself, and would not require my help.
But my powers, where are they for this undertaking? I do not feel
them. Nothing speaks or stirs in me while you talk.
I am sensible of no light kindling, no life quickening,
no voice cancelling or cheering. Oh, I wish I could
make you see how much my mind is at this moment like a rayless dungeon,
with one shrinking fear fettered in its steps, the fear of
being persuaded by you to attempt what I cannot accomplish.
I have an answer for you. Hear it. I have watched
you ever since we first met. I have made you my study for
ten months. I have proved you in that time by sundry tests,
and what have I seen and elicited? In the village school I found
you could perform well, punctually, uprightly, labor,
uncongenial to your habits and inclinations. I saw you could perform
it with capacity and tact. You could win while you controlled.
In the calm with which you learnt you had become suddenly rich,
I read a mind clear of the vice of Dimah.
Lucre had no undue power over you. In the resolute readiness with
which you cut your wealth into four shares, keeping but one to yourself
and relinquishing the three others to the claim of abstract justice,
I recognized a soul that reveled in the flame and excitement of sacrifice.
In the tractability with which, at my wish,
you first took a study in which you were interested, and adopted
another because it interested me. In the untiring assiduity
with which you have since persevered in it. In the unflagging
energy and unshaken temper with which you have met its difficulties,
I acknowledge the compliment of the qualities I seek.
Jane, you are docile, diligent, disinterested,
faithful, constant, and courageous,
very gentle, and very heroic. Cease to mistrust
yourself. I can trust you unreservedly.
As a conductress of Indian schools and a helper amongst Indian women,
your assistance will be, to me, invaluable.
My iron shroud contracted round me.
Persuasion advanced with slow, sure step.
Shut my eyes as I would. These last words of his succeeded in making
the way, which had seemed blocked up, comparatively clear.
My work, which had appeared so vague, so hopelessly diffuse,
condensed itself as he proceeded, and assumed a definite form
under his shaping hand. He waited for an answer.
I demanded a quarter of an hour to think before I again hazarded a reply.
Very willingly, he rejoined, and rising,
he strode a little distance up the pass, threw himself down
on a swell of heath, and there lay still.
I can do what he wants me to do. I am forced to see and acknowledge that,
I meditated. That is, if life be spared me,
but I feel mine is not the existence to be long protracted under an
Indian son. What then? He does not care for that.
When my time came to die, he would resign me in all serenity and sanctity
to the God who gave me. The case is very
plain before me. In leaving England, I should leave a loved
but empty land. Mr. Rochester is not there.
And if he were, what is, what can that ever be
to me? My business is to live without him now,
nothing so absurd, so weak as to drag on from day to day as if
I were waiting some impossible change in circumstances,
which might reunite me to him. Of course, as St. John once
said, I must seek another interest in life to replace the one lost.
Is not the occupation he now offers me truly the most
glorious man can adopt or God assign? Is it not
by its noble cares and sublime results, the one best calculated
to fill the void left by up-torn affections and demolished hopes?
I believe I must say yes, and yet I shudder.
Alas, if I join St. John, I abandon half myself.
If I go to India, I go to premature death.
And how will the interval between leaving England for India and India for the
grave be filled? Oh, I know well. That too
is very clear to my vision. By straining to satisfy St. John till
my sinews ache, I shall satisfy him, to the finest central point
and farthest outward circle of his expectations.
If I do go with him, if I do make the sacrifice he urges,
I will make it absolutely. I will throw all on the altar,
heart, vitals, the entire victim. He will never love me,
but he shall approve me. I will show him energies
he has not seen, resources he has never suspected.
Yes, I can work as hard as he can, and with his
little grudging. Consent, then, to his demand is possible.
But for one item, one dreadful item,
it is that he asks me to be his wife, and has no more
of a husband's heart for me than that frowning giant of a rock,
down which the stream is foaming in yonder gorge. He prizes
me as a soldier with a good weapon, and that is all. Unmarried to
him, this would never grieve me. But can I let him complete
his calculations, coolly put into practice his plans,
go through the wedding ceremony? Can I receive from him
the bridal ring, endure all the forms of love, which
I doubt not he would scrupulously observe, and know that the
spirit was quite absent? Can I bear the consciousness
that every endearment he bestows is a sacrifice made on principle?
No, such a martyrdom would be monstrous. I will
never undergo it. As his sister I might accompany him,
not as his wife. I will tell him so.
I looked towards the knoll, there he lay, still as a prostrate
column. His face turned to me, his eye beaming
watchful and keen. He started to his feet and approached me.
I am ready to go to India, if I may go free.
Your answer requires a commentary, he said.
It is not clear. You have hitherto been
my adopted brother, I your adopted sister. Let us
continue as such. You and I had better not marry. He shook
his head. Adopted fraternity will not do in this case.
If you were my real sister it would be different. I should take
you and seek no wife. But, as it is, either our union
must be consecrated and sealed by marriage, or it cannot exist.
Practical obstacles oppose themselves to any other plan.
Do you not see it, Jane? Consider a moment. Your strong
sense will guide you. I did consider, and
still my sense, such as it was, directed me only to the fact that we did
not love each other as man and wife should, and therefore
it inferred we ought not to marry. I said so.
St. John, I returned, I regard you as a brother, you me as a sister.
So let us continue. We cannot, we cannot,
he answered with short, sharp determination. It would not
do. You have said you will go with me to India. Remember, you have said
that. Conditionally. Well, well,
to the main point, the departure with me from England,
the cooperation with me and my future labors. You do not object.
You have already as good as put your hand to the plow. You are
too consistent to withdraw it. You have but one end to keep in view,
how the work you have undertaken can best be done.
Simplify your complicated interests, feelings, thoughts, wishes, aims.
Merge all considerations in one purpose, that
of fulfilling with effect, with power, the mission of your great
master. To do so you must have a coadjutor,
not a brother, that is a loose tie, but a husband.
I too do not want a sister. A sister might any day be taken
from me. I want a wife, the sole help-meat
I can influence efficiently in life and retain absolutely
till death. I shuddered as he spoke, I felt
his influence in my marrow, his hold on my limbs.
Seek one elsewhere than in me, St. John, seek one fitted
to you. One fitted to my purpose you mean,
fitted to my vocation. Again I tell you, it is not
the insignificant private individual, the mere man with the man's
selfish senses I wish to mate. It is a missionary.
And I will give the missionary my energies. It is all he
wants, but not myself. That would be only adding the husk and shell
to the kernel. For them he has no use. I retain them.
You cannot, you ought not. Do you think God will be satisfied
with half an oblation? Will he accept a mutilated
sacrifice? It is the cause of God, I advocate. It is
under his standard, I enlist you. I cannot accept on his behalf
a divided allegiance. It must be entire.
Oh, I will give my heart to God, I said. You do not want it.
I will not swear, reader, that there was not something of repressed
sarcasm both in the tone in which I uttered this sentence,
and in the feeling that accompanied it. I had silently feared
St. John till now, because I had not understood him.
He had held me in awe, because he had held me in doubt.
How much of him was saint, how much mortal, I could not hear to
foretell. But revelations were being made in this conference.
The analysis of his nature was proceeding before my eyes.
I saw his fallibilities. I comprehended them.
I understood that, sitting there, where I did, on the bank of Heath,
and with that handsome form before me, I sat at
the feet of a man, erring his eye. The veil fell
from his hardness and despotism. Having felt in him the presence
of these qualities, I felt his imperfection, and took courage.
I was with an equal, one with whom I might argue,
one whom, if I saw good, I might resist.
He was silent after I had uttered the last sentence, and I presently
risked an upward glance at his countenance. His eye bent on me,
expressed at once stern surprise and keen inquiry.
Is she sarcastic, and sarcastic to me,
it seemed to say. What does this signify?
Do not let us forget that this is a solemn matter,
he said ere long, one of which we may neither think
nor talk lightly without sin. I trust, Jane, you are
in earnest when you say you will give your heart to God. It is all I want.
Once wrench your heart from man, and fix it on your
Maker. The advancement of that Maker's spiritual kingdom on earth
will be your chief delight and endeavor. You will be ready to do at
once whatever furthers that end. You will see what impetus
would be given to your efforts and mind by our physical and mental union
in marriage, the only union that gives a character of permanent conformity
to the destinies and designs of human beings.
And passing over all minor compresses, all trivial
difficulties and delicacies of feeling, all scruple about the degree,
kind, strength, or tenderness of mere personal inclination,
you will hasten to enter into that union at once.
Shall I, I said briefly, and I looked at his features, beautiful in their
harmony, but strangely formidable in their still severity,
at his brow, commanding but not open, at his eyes,
bright and deep, and searching, but never soft, at his tall
imposing figure, and fancied myself an idea,
his wife. Oh, it would never do,
as his curate, his comrade, all would be right. I would cross
oceans with him in that capacity, toil under eastern suns
in Asian deserts with him in that office, admire and
emulate his courage and devotion and vigor, accommodate quietly
to his masterhood, smile undisturbed at his ineradicable
ambition, discriminate the Christian from the man,
profoundly esteem the one, and freely forgive the other.
I should suffer often, no doubt, attached to him only in this capacity,
my body would be under rather a stringent yoke,
but my heart and mind would be free. I should still have
my unbladed self to turn to, my natural unenslaved
feelings with which to communicate in moments of loneliness.
There would be recesses in my mind which would be only mine, to which
he never came, and sentiments growing there fresh and sheltered,
which his austerity could never blight, nor his measured warrior march
trampled down. But as his wife, at his side always,
and always restrained and always checked, forced to keep the fire of
my nature continually low, to compel it to burn inwardly and never
utter a cry, though the imprisoned flame consumed vital after
vital, this would be unendurable.
St. John, I exclaimed, when I had got so far in my meditation.
Well? he answered icily.
I repeat, I freely consent to go with you as your fellow missionary,
but not as your wife. I cannot marry you and become part of you.
A part of me you must become, he answered steadily.
Otherwise the whole bargain is void.
How can I, a man not yet thirty, take out with me to India
a girl of nineteen, unless she be married to me?
How can we be forever together, sometimes in solitudes,
sometimes amidst savage tribes and unwed?
Very well, I said shortly, under the circumstances, quite as
well as if I were either your real sister, or a man and a clergyman
like yourself. It is known that you are not my sister.
I cannot introduce you as such. To attempt it would be to fasten
injurious suspicions on us both. And for the rest,
though you have a man's vigorous brain, you have a woman's heart.
And it would not do.
It would do, I affirmed with some disdain, perfectly well. I have a woman's heart,
but not where you are concerned. For you I have only a comrade's
constancy, a fellow soldier's frankness, fidelity, fraternity,
if you like, a neophyte's respect and submission to his
hierophant. Nothing more. Don't fear.
It is what I want, he said, speaking to himself.
It is just what I want, and there are obstacles in the way.
They must be hewn down. Jane, you would not repent
marrying me, be certain of that. We must be married.
I repeat it. There is no other way, and undoubtedly
enough of love would follow upon marriage to render the union right
even in your eyes. I scorn your idea of love.
I could not help saying, as I rose up and stood before him,
leaning my back against the rock, I scorn the counterfeit
sentiment you offer. Yes, St. John, I scorn you when you offer it.
He looked at me fixedly, compressing
his well-cut lips while he did so. Whether he was
incensed or surprised, or what, it was not easy to tell.
He could command his countenance thoroughly.
I scarcely expected to hear that expression
from you, he said. I think I have done
and uttered nothing to deserve scorn.
I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his high, calm
mind. Forgive me the words, St. John,
but it is your own fault that I have been roused to speak so unguardedly.
You have introduced a topic on which our natures are at variance,
a topic we should never discuss. The very name of love
is an apple of discord between us. If the reality were
required, what should we do? How should we feel?
My dear cousin, abandon your scheme of marriage. Forget it.
No, said he. It is a long, cherished
scheme, and the only one which can secure my great end.
But I shall urge you no further at present. Tomorrow I leave
home for Cambridge. I have many friends there to whom I should wish
to say farewell. I shall be absent to fortnight.
Take that space of time to consider my offer, and do not forget
that if you reject it, it is not me you deny, but God.
Through my means, he opens to you a noble career,
as my wife only can you enter upon it.
Refuse to be my wife, and you limit yourself forever to
a track of selfish ease and barren obscurity.
Trumble, lest in that case you should be numbered with those who have denied
the faith, and are worse than infidels.
He had done. Turning for me, he once
more looked to the river, looked to hill. But this time
his feelings were all pent in his heart. I was not worthy to hear
them uttered. As I walked by his side homeward, I read
well in his iron silence all he felt towards me. The disappointment
of an austere and despotic nature, which has met resistance where
it expected submission, the disapprobation of a cool and flexible
judgment, which has detected in another feelings and views in which
it has no power to sympathize. In short, as a man,
he would have wished to coerce me into obedience. It was only
as a sincere Christian he bore so patiently with my perversity, and
allowed so long a space for reflection and repentance.
That night, after he had kissed his sisters, he thought proper to forget
even to shake hands with me, but left the room in silence.
I, who though I had no love, had much friendship for him.
I was hurt by the marked omission.
So much hurt that tears started to my eyes.
I see you and St. John have been quarreling, Jane, said Diana, during
your walk on the moor. But go after him. He is now lingering in the passage
expecting you. He will make it up.
I have not much pride under such circumstances. I would always
rather be happy than dignified, and I ran after him. He stood
at the foot of the stairs.
Good night, St. John, said I.
Good night, Jane, he replied calmly.
Then shake hands, I added. What a cold, loose
touch he impressed on my fingers. He was deeply displeased
by what had occurred that day. Corgeality would not warm,
nor tears move him. No happy reconciliation was to
be had with him. No cheering smile or generous word.
But still the Christian was patient and placid, and when I asked
him if he forgave me, he answered that he was not in the habit of
cherishing the remembrance of vexation, that he had nothing to
give, not having been offended. And with that answer he left me.
I would much rather he had knocked me down.